README.md, before:


# Contract Monthly Claim System (CMCS)
Youtube video link: 
https://youtu.be/y5Fd3QBPHmE

Power Point Sldes Link: https://1drv.ms/p/c/af22570ea07a3046/IQBta7yG5N_GQI4qnYI5KKgFAVZZbjaVkr16uS9hz3wPaiw?e=dgJ4Ho 

## 📋 Overview
The **Contract Monthly Claim System (CMCS)** is a comprehensive web application designed to streamline the monthly claim submission and approval process for academic contractors. Built with ASP.NET Core MVC and SQL Server, it provides a secure, efficient, and user-friendly platform for managing contractor payments.

---

## 🎯 Key Features

### 👥 Multi-Role Access System
- **👨‍🏫 Lecturers**: Submit claims, track status, upload documents
- **👨‍💼 Coordinators**: Review and verify pending claims
- **👔 Managers**: Final approval and payment processing
- **👥 HR Administrators**: User management and system oversight

### 🔄 Automated Workflow
- Streamlined two-tier approval process
- Real-time status tracking
- Automatic total calculations
- Document management system

### 📊 Advanced Reporting
- Monthly invoice generation (PDF)
- Comprehensive analytics
- Claim statistics and financial overview
- Custom report filtering

---

## 🛠️ Technology Stack

### Backend
- **Framework**: ASP.NET Core 6.0 MVC
- **Language**: C#
- **ORM**: Entity Framework Core
- **Authentication**: Custom session-based with role management

### Frontend
- **UI Framework**: Bootstrap 5
- **Styling**: Custom CSS with emoji integration
- **JavaScript**: jQuery for interactive elements
- **Validation**: Client-side and server-side validation

### Database
- **Database**: Microsoft SQL Server
- **Features**: Computed columns, foreign key constraints, unique indexing

### Additional Components
- **PDF Generation**: iTextSharp
- **File Handling**: Secure document upload/download
- **Session Management**: Custom middleware

---

## 🗄️ Database Schema

### Users Table
- User profiles with role-based access (HR, Lecturer, Coordinator, Manager)
- Secure password hashing (SHA-256)
- Lecturer ID auto-generation
- Role-specific permissions

### Claims Table
- Monthly claim submissions
- Computed total amounts (Hours × Rate)
- Document attachment support
- Multi-status workflow tracking

---

## 🚀 Installation & Setup

### Prerequisites
- .NET 9.0 SDK
- SQL Server 2019+
- Visual Studio 2022+ 

### Installation Steps
1. **Clone Repository**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/your-username/cmcs-system.git
   cd cmcs-system
   ```

2. **Database Setup**
   - Update connection string in `appsettings.json`
   - Run database migrations:
   ```bash
   Update-Database
   ```

3. **Build and Run**
   ```bash
   dotnet build
   dotnet run
   ```

4. **Initial Setup**
   - System creates default HR admin on first run
   - HR admin can create additional users

---

## 👤 User Guides

### For Lecturers
1. **Login** with HR-provided credentials
2. **Submit Claim**: Enter hours worked, upload supporting documents
3. **Track Status**: Monitor claim through approval workflow
4. **View History**: Access previous submissions and status

### For Coordinators
1. **Review Claims**: Access pending claims dashboard
2. **Verify Information**: Check hours, rates, and documents
3. **Approve/Reject**: Make decisions with comments
4. **Forward to Management**: Send approved claims for final review

### For Managers
1. **Final Approval**: Review coordinator-approved claims
2. **Payment Processing**: Authorize payments
3. **Financial Oversight**: Monitor claim totals and trends

### For HR Administrators
1. **User Management**: Create, edit, and deactivate users
2. **System Monitoring**: View all claims and user activity
3. **Report Generation**: Create monthly invoices and analytics
4. **System Configuration**: Manage roles and permissions

---

## 🔒 Security Features

- Role-based access control
- Session management with custom middleware
- Secure file upload validation
- SQL injection prevention
- Password hashing (SHA-256)
- Input validation and sanitization

---

## 📁 Project Structure

```
CMCS_MVC_Prototype/
├── Controllers/
│   ├── AuthController.cs
│   ├── ClaimsController.cs
│   ├── CoordinatorController.cs
│   ├── ManagerController.cs
│   └── HRController.cs
├── Models/
│   ├── Claim.cs
│   ├── User.cs
│   └── ReportViewModel.cs
├── Views/
│   ├── Auth/
│   ├── Claims/
│   ├── Coordinator/
│   ├── Manager/
│   └── HR/
├── Services/
│   ├── IClaimService.cs
│   ├── ClaimService.cs
│   ├── IUserService.cs
│   ├── UserService.cs
│   ├── IAuthService.cs
│   └── AuthService.cs
├── Data/
│   └── ApplicationDbContext.cs
├── Middleware/
│   └── SessionAuthMiddleware.cs
└── Migrations/
```

---

## 🎨 UI/UX Features

- **Responsive Design**: Works on desktop and mobile devices
- **Intuitive Navigation**: Role-appropriate menu structures
- **Visual Feedback**: Emoji-based status indicators
- **Professional Styling**: Bootstrap-based clean interface
- **Accessibility**: Clear labels and error messages

---

## 🔧 Configuration

### AppSettings.json
```json
{
  "ConnectionStrings": {
    "DefaultConnection": "Server=YOUR_SERVER;Database=CMCS_Database;Trusted_Connection=true;TrustServerCertificate=true"
  },
  "Logging": {
    "LogLevel": {
      "Default": "Information",
      "Microsoft.AspNetCore": "Warning"
    }
  }
}
```

---

## 📈 Business Benefits

### Efficiency Improvements
- ⏱️ 90% faster claim processing
- 📊 100% digital documentation
- 👥 Reduced administrative overhead
- 💰 Lower operational costs

### Stakeholder Value
- **Lecturers**: Faster payments, transparency
- **Administrators**: Efficient workflow management
- **Management**: Better financial control and reporting
- **HR**: Centralized user and system management

---

## 🚀 Future Enhancements

- [ ] Email notifications and reminders
- [ ] Mobile application
- [ ] REST API for third-party integrations
- [ ] Advanced analytics dashboard
- [ ] Multi-language support
- [ ] Payment gateway integration
- [ ] Bulk operations
- [ ] Advanced reporting features

---

## 🤝 Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/AmazingFeature`)
3. Commit changes (`git commit -m 'Add some AmazingFeature'`)
4. Push to branch (`git push origin feature/AmazingFeature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

---

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE.md](LICENSE.md) file for details.

---

## 📞 Support

For technical support or questions:
- Create an issue in the GitHub repository
- Contact the development team
- Refer to system documentation

---

## 🎯 Demo & Presentation

A comprehensive PowerPoint presentation is available showcasing:
- System architecture and design
- User workflows and features
- Technical specifications
- Business value proposition

---

**Built with ❤️ using ASP.NET Core, SQL Server, and modern web technologies**

Commit message:

Update README to add login info
 Added initial login credentials for testing.

README.md, after:


# Contract Monthly Claim System (CMCS)
Youtube video link: 
https://youtu.be/y5Fd3QBPHmE

Power Point Sldes Link: https://1drv.ms/p/c/af22570ea07a3046/IQBta7yG5N_GQI4qnYI5KKgFAVZZbjaVkr16uS9hz3wPaiw?e=dgJ4Ho 

## 📋 Overview
The **Contract Monthly Claim System (CMCS)** is a comprehensive web application designed to streamline the monthly claim submission and approval process for academic contractors. Built with ASP.NET Core MVC and SQL Server, it provides a secure, efficient, and user-friendly platform for managing contractor payments.

---

## 🎯 Key Features

### 👥 Multi-Role Access System
- **👨‍🏫 Lecturers**: Submit claims, track status, upload documents
- **👨‍💼 Coordinators**: Review and verify pending claims
- **👔 Managers**: Final approval and payment processing
- **👥 HR Administrators**: User management and system oversight

### 🔄 Automated Workflow
- Streamlined two-tier approval process
- Real-time status tracking
- Automatic total calculations
- Document management system

### 📊 Advanced Reporting
- Monthly invoice generation (PDF)
- Comprehensive analytics
- Claim statistics and financial overview
- Custom report filtering

---

## 🛠️ Technology Stack

### Backend
- **Framework**: ASP.NET Core 6.0 MVC
- **Language**: C#
- **ORM**: Entity Framework Core
- **Authentication**: Custom session-based with role management

### Frontend
- **UI Framework**: Bootstrap 5
- **Styling**: Custom CSS with emoji integration
- **JavaScript**: jQuery for interactive elements
- **Validation**: Client-side and server-side validation

### Database
- **Database**: Microsoft SQL Server
- **Features**: Computed columns, foreign key constraints, unique indexing

### Additional Components
- **PDF Generation**: iTextSharp
- **File Handling**: Secure document upload/download
- **Session Management**: Custom middleware

---

## 🗄️ Database Schema

### Users Table
- User profiles with role-based access (HR, Lecturer, Coordinator, Manager)
- Secure password hashing (SHA-256)
- Lecturer ID auto-generation
- Role-specific permissions

### Claims Table
- Monthly claim submissions
- Computed total amounts (Hours × Rate)
- Document attachment support
- Multi-status workflow tracking

---

## 🚀 Installation & Setup

### Prerequisites
- .NET 9.0 SDK
- SQL Server 2019+
- Visual Studio 2022+ 

### Installation Steps
1. **Clone Repository**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/your-username/cmcs-system.git
   cd cmcs-system
   ```

2. **Database Setup**
   - Update connection string in `appsettings.json`
   - Run database migrations:
   ```bash
   Update-Database
   ```

3. **Build and Run**
   ```bash
   dotnet build
   dotnet run
   ```

4. **Initial Setup**
   - System creates default HR admin on first run
   - HR admin can create additional users

---

## 👤 User Guides

### For Lecturers
1. **Login** with HR-provided credentials
2. **Submit Claim**: Enter hours worked, upload supporting documents
3. **Track Status**: Monitor claim through approval workflow
4. **View History**: Access previous submissions and status

### For Coordinators
1. **Review Claims**: Access pending claims dashboard
2. **Verify Information**: Check hours, rates, and documents
3. **Approve/Reject**: Make decisions with comments
4. **Forward to Management**: Send approved claims for final review

### For Managers
1. **Final Approval**: Review coordinator-approved claims
2. **Payment Processing**: Authorize payments
3. **Financial Oversight**: Monitor claim totals and trends

### For HR Administrators
1. **User Management**: Create, edit, and deactivate users
2. **System Monitoring**: View all claims and user activity
3. **Report Generation**: Create monthly invoices and analytics
4. **System Configuration**: Manage roles and permissions

---

## 🔒 Security Features

- Role-based access control
- Session management with custom middleware
- Secure file upload validation
- SQL injection prevention
- Password hashing (SHA-256)
- Input validation and sanitization

---

## 📁 Project Structure

```
CMCS_MVC_Prototype/
├── Controllers/
│   ├── AuthController.cs
│   ├── ClaimsController.cs
│   ├── CoordinatorController.cs
│   ├── ManagerController.cs
│   └── HRController.cs
├── Models/
│   ├── Claim.cs
│   ├── User.cs
│   └── ReportViewModel.cs
├── Views/
│   ├── Auth/
│   ├── Claims/
│   ├── Coordinator/
│   ├── Manager/
│   └── HR/
├── Services/
│   ├── IClaimService.cs
│   ├── ClaimService.cs
│   ├── IUserService.cs
│   ├── UserService.cs
│   ├── IAuthService.cs
│   └── AuthService.cs
├── Data/
│   └── ApplicationDbContext.cs
├── Middleware/
│   └── SessionAuthMiddleware.cs
└── Migrations/
```

---

## 🎨 UI/UX Features

- **Responsive Design**: Works on desktop and mobile devices
- **Intuitive Navigation**: Role-appropriate menu structures
- **Visual Feedback**: Emoji-based status indicators
- **Professional Styling**: Bootstrap-based clean interface
- **Accessibility**: Clear labels and error messages

---

## 🔧 Configuration

### AppSettings.json
```json
{
  "ConnectionStrings": {
    "DefaultConnection": "Server=YOUR_SERVER;Database=CMCS_Database;Trusted_Connection=true;TrustServerCertificate=true"
  },
  "Logging": {
    "LogLevel": {
      "Default": "Information",
      "Microsoft.AspNetCore": "Warning"
    }
  }
}
```

---

## 📈 Business Benefits

### Efficiency Improvements
- ⏱️ 90% faster claim processing
- 📊 100% digital documentation
- 👥 Reduced administrative overhead
- 💰 Lower operational costs

### Stakeholder Value
- **Lecturers**: Faster payments, transparency
- **Administrators**: Efficient workflow management
- **Management**: Better financial control and reporting
- **HR**: Centralized user and system management

---



## 🤝 Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/AmazingFeature`)
3. Commit changes (`git commit -m 'Add some AmazingFeature'`)
4. Push to branch (`git push origin feature/AmazingFeature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

---

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE.md](LICENSE.md) file for details.

---

## 📞 Support

For technical support or questions:
- Create an issue in the GitHub repository
- Contact the development team
- Refer to system documentation

---

## 🎯 Demo & Presentation

A comprehensive PowerPoint presentation is available showcasing:
- System architecture and design
- User workflows and features
- Technical specifications
- Business value proposition
- For intial login for testing, here are login credentials: HR Admin - hr@university.edu / admin123

---
